The double-edged sword of pedagogy: Instruction limits spontaneous
exploration and discovery
Elizabeth Bonawitz  Patrick Shafto  Hyowon Gweon Noah D. Goodman Elizabeth Spelke Laura Schulz

a b s t r a c t
Motivated by computational analyses, we look at how teaching affects exploration and discovery.
In Experiment 1, we investigated children’s exploratory play after an adult pedagogically
demonstrated a function of a toy, after an interrupted pedagogical
demonstration, after a naïve adult demonstrated the function, and at baseline. Preschoolers
in the pedagogical condition focused almost exclusively on the target function; by contrast,
children in the other conditions explored broadly. In Experiment 2, we show that children
restrict their exploration both after direct instruction to themselves and after overhearing
direct instruction given to another child; they do not show this constraint after observing
direct instruction given to an adult or after observing a non-pedagogical intentional action.
We discuss these findings as the result of rational inductive biases. In pedagogical contexts,
a teacher’s failure to provide evidence for additional functions provides evidence for their
absence; such contexts generalize from child to child (because children are likely to have
comparable states of knowledge) but not from adult to child. Thus, pedagogy promotes
efficient learning but at a cost: children are less likely to perform potentially irrelevant
actions but also less likely to discover novel information.

Introduction
Two competing intuitions animate longstanding debates
over children’s learning: that children learn primarily
from helpful, informative others (through testimony or
‘‘direct instruction’’; Csibra & Gergely, 2009; Gergely,
Király, & Egyed, 2007; Koenig & Harris, 2005; Kushnir,
Wellman, & Gelman, 2008; Tomasello & Barton, 1994;
Vygotsky, 1978), and that, especially in the early years,
children learn chiefly through their own active exploration
of the environment (‘‘constructivist’’ or ‘‘discovery learning’’;
Bonawitz, Lim, & Schulz, 2007; Bonawitz & Schulz,
in preparation; Bruner, Jolly, & Sylva, 1976; Gweon &
Schulz, 2008; Piaget, 1929; Schulz & Bonawitz, 2007;
Singer, Golinkoff, & Hirsh-Pasek, 2008). Here we suggest
that the tension between learning from others and from
self-guided exploration stems in part from a principled
trade-off at the heart of pedagogical learning. Teaching2
produces an inductive bias that constrains children’s
hypothesis space for better and for worse: in promoting rapid
and efficient learning of target material, pedagogical
instruction necessarily limits the range of hypotheses children
consider.
Our inquiry is motivated by an ideal learner analysis—
what should a student infer from evidence given by a helpful
teacher? Recent research has formalized pedagogical
learning as an inference based on the paired assumptions
that a learner will rationally update her belief in a hypothesis
given new data (from a pedagogical demonstration)
and that a teacher will choose data (a particular demonstration)
likely to increase the learner’s belief in the correct
hypothesis (Shafto & Goodman, 2008; Shafto, Goodman, &
Griffiths, in preparation). In what follows, we present details
of our Bayesian analysis and two experiments motivated
from this analysis, exploring the consequences of
pedagogical inference on preschool-aged children’s exploration
and discovery.
An ideal learner will update her beliefs rationally given
the demonstration (or data), d, as described by Bayes’
theorem:
PL›hjdﬁ / P›djhﬁPL›hﬁ: ›1ﬁ
In Eq. (1), PL(h) represents the learner’s prior beliefs in a
hypothesis h. The term P(d|h), called the likelihood or sampling
assumption, captures the learner’s assumption about
the source of the data. If the learner did not believe the
data were chosen by a helpful teacher, then we would
use a default sampling assumption in Eq. (1): PD(d|h). This
default will depend on the situation, and captures the natural
source of evidence in the absence of a teacher (e.g. by
random exploration). However, if the learner assumes that
a helpful teacher has chosen the data, we must use a pedagogical
sampling assumption:
PL›hjdﬁ / PT ›djhﬁPL›hﬁ; ›10ﬁ
PT ›djhﬁ / PL›hjdﬁ; ›2ﬁ
Eq. (2) captures the idea that the data are chosen by the
teacher in such a way that they will increase the probability
that the learner assigns to the correct hypothesis. Note
that the teacher’s choice of data depends in turn on the
assumption that the learner will rationally update her beliefs.
Eqs. (10) and (2), and the default sampling assumption,
define a system of equations that provides a model
of how having a teacher should affect a learner’s inferences.
Intuitively, one can imagine beginning with the
inferences the learner would draw under the default sampling
assumption, then using Eqs. (10) and (2) iteratively to
‘‘strengthen’’ these inferences into the ideal pedagogical
inferences. (See Shafto & Goodman, 2008; Shafto et al., in
preparation, for further discussion.)
